Add content for QUIC (#191)
libp2p/docs: content/concepts/transport.md

   This makes it practically impossible to deploy any changes to the TCP protocol that change the 
   wire format.

3. Handshake inefficiency: the 3-way handshake is inefficient, as it spends 1-RTT on verifying 
   the client’s address.

QUIC was designed with the following goals in mind:

- Streams at the transport layer, thereby overcoming HoL blocking
- Reducing the latency of connection establishment to a single RTT for new connections, and to 
  allow sending of 0-RTT application data for resumed connections
- Encrypting as much as possible. This eliminates the ossification risk, as middleboxes aren't 
  able to read any encrypted fields, and allows future evolution of the protocol

### Comparing HTTP/2 and HTTP/3

The IETF introduced a new hypertext transfer protocol standard in late 2018, 
which turned into a proposed standard for HTTP/3 in 
[RFC 9114](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9114). HTTP/3 combines the advantages 
of the existing transfer protocols HTTP/2 and HTTP over QUIC in one standard for faster and 
more stable data transmission.

The following diagram illustrates the OSI model for HTTP/2 and HTTP/3:

> ![HTTP/2 & HTTP/3 OSI model](https://cloudspoint.xyz/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/http3.png)

Reviewer: This is the diagram I was looking for. Are we allowed to include it from a 3rd-party site without their permission?

Author: Oh I originally had a reference added, and added it back.

Author: Would eventually add this as an SVG

A web browser connection typically entails the following **(TCP+TLS+HTTP/2)**:

1. Transport layer: TCP runs on top of the IP layer to provide a reliable 
   byte stream.
   - TCP provides a reliable, bidirectional connection between two end systems.
2. Security layer: A TLS handshake runs on top of TCP to
   establish an encrypted and authenticated connection.
   - Standard TLS over TCP requires 3-RTT. A typical TLS 1.3 handshake takes 1-RTT.
3. Application layer: HTTP runs on a secure transport connection to transfer 
   information and applies a stream muxer to serve multiple requests.
   - Application data starts to flow.

In contrast, HTTP/3 runs over [QUIC](##what-is-quic), where QUIC is similar to 
TCP+TLS+HTTP/2 and runs over UDP. Building on UDP allows HTTP/3 to bypass the challenges 
found in TCP and use all the advantages of HTTP/2 and HTTP over QUIC.

### What is QUIC?

> QUIC combines the functionality of these layers. It sends UDP packets and therefore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QUIC combines the functionality of these layers. Instead of TCP, it builds on UDP. When a UDP datagram is lost, it is not automatically retransmitted by the kernel. QUIC therefore takes responsibility...
```

it is responsible for loss detection and repair itself. By using encryption, 
QUIC avoids ossified middleboxes. The TLS 1.3 handshake is performed in the first flight, 

> removing the 1-RTT cost of verifying the client’s address. QUIC also exposes multiple 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
removing the cost of verifying the client’s address (saving an RTT). QUIC exposes streams (and not just a single byte stream)```

streams, so no stream multiplexer is needed at the application layer. Part of the application 
layer is also built directly into QUIC; when you run HTTP on top of QUIC; only a small shim 
layer exists that maps 
[HTTP semantics](https://httpwg.org/http-core/draft-ietf-httpbis-semantics-latest.html) 

> onto QUIC streams.

Reviewer: I don't think that's accurate. We can probably just remove this last sentence.

> QUIC supports the resumption of connections (0-RTT connections), allowing a 

Reviewer: Getting really pedantic, here, but there's a difference between resumption and 0-RTT (which we don't need to explain here) ;)
```suggestion
When a client has communicated with a certain server in the past, it can make use of QUIC's 0-RTT feature for subsequent connections. It can then send (encrypted) application data even before the QUIC handshake has finished.
```

client to send application data right away, even before the QUIC handshake has finished.

> <!-- to add diagram -->

Reviewer: Which diagram do you want to add here?

### QUIC in libp2p

> libp2p only supports bidirectional streams and uses TLS 1.3 by default. 
> libp2p directly uses QUIC streams, without any additional framing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since QUIC already provides an encrypted, stream-multiplexed connection, libp2p directly uses QUIC streams, without any additional framing.
```

{{% /notice %}}

[definition_switch]: /reference/glossary/#switch

## QUIC

Transport protocols continue to improve transport methods in an attempt to alleviate 
the shortcomings of the transport layer. 

{{% notice "note" %}}

Recalling the purpose of transports

The IP service model provides logical communication between hosts (or nodes) but 
is considered a best-effort delivery service, as segment delivery is not guaranteed. 
The primary responsibility of transport protocols is to extend the IP 
delivery service between two end systems. TCP connects the unreliable service of IP 
between end systems into a reliable transport service between processes (i.e., the 
processes running on the end systems). The purpose of newer transport protocols is not 
only to improve current transport methods but also to allow for efficient connections 
that distributed and peer-to-peer network stacks can utilize, like libp2p.

{{% /notice %}}

We need a transport protocol that:

- Understands streams 

> - Is not byte-ordered

Reviewer 2: what is this?

Author: Addressed

under particular conditions. A minimum packet size rule exists for the first packet to 
ensure that small malicious packets like SYN packets cannot be sent and consume excessive 
resources, as can be done with TCP.

QUIC saves another round-trip in using TLS 1.3 by optimistically providing keyshares. 
If you have established a connection before, the host can send you a session ticket 
that can be used to establish a new secure connection instantly, without any round-trips.

> Over the last several years, the IETF has been working on a new version of TLS, TLS 1.3.
> Learn more about TLS 1.3 and how it is used in libp2p on the secure communication concept guide.

<!-- to add link to secure comm guide, and later to the specific doc that covers TLS -->

libp2p only supports bidirectional streams and uses TLS 1.3 by default (but can use other
cryptography methods). The streams in libp2p map cleanly to QUIC packets.

When a connection starts, peers will take their host key and create a self-signed CA 
certificate. They then sign an intermediate chain using their self-signed CA and put it 
as a certificate chain in the TLS handshake.

> At the end of the handshake, each peer knows the certificate of the other. The peer can 

Reviewer 2: I'd link to the TLS spec in libp2p/specs

Author: Updated

verify if the connection was established with the correct peer by looking up the first 
CA certificate on the certificate chain, retreive the public key, and using it to calculate 

> the opposing peer ID. QUIC acts like a record layer with TLS 1.3  as the backend as TLS is 

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what a record vs backend layer is

Author: The idea is to show how QUIC takes the role of the record layer found in TLS

Updated

responsible for all the cryptography.

{{% notice "info" %}}

> To be clear, there is no additional security handshake and stream muxer need as QUIC provides 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To be clear, there is no additional security handshake and stream muxer needed as QUIC provides 
```

all of this by default.

{{% /notice %}}

Following the multiaddress format described earlier, a standard QUIC connection will
look like:

```
/ip4/127.0.0.1/udp/65432/quic/
```

In this section, we offered an overview of QUIC and how QUIC works in libp2p.

{{% notice "tip" %}}

For more details on QUIC, including its limitations 

> check out the following resources:

Reviewer 2: ?

Author: thanks, forgot the links but I also think this isn't that necessary. I can re-add the note if otherwise

{{% /notice %}}

## WebTransport

Another transport protocol under development at the IETF is WebTransport.
WebTransport is a new specification that uses QUIC to offer an alternative to

> WebSockets. Instead, it can be considered WebSockets over QUIC by allowing 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WebSockets. It can be considered WebSockets over QUIC by allowing 
```

browsers to establish a stream-multiplexed and bidirectional 
connection to servers. 

The specification can depend on and reuse the QUIC infrastructure in place 

> to offer WebSockets that take the benefits of UDP and offer sockets without head-of-line 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to offer WebSockets that take the benefits of UDP and offer streams without head-of-line 
```

blocking.

Recall that WebSockets are bidirectional, full-duplex communication between two 

> points over a single-socket connection. WebTransports, as a result, can be used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
points over a single-socket connection. WebTransport can be used
```

> like WebSockets, but with the support of multistreams.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
like WebSockets, but with the support of multiple streams.
```

WebTransport streams can be arbitrary in size and independent when possible. 
They are reliable but can be canceled when possible. The datagrams in a 

> WebTransport connections are MTU-sized and can be unreliable when possible.

Reviewer 2: I don't follow what "when possible" means. 

We don't support unreliable datagrams with webtransport

Author: Addressed

{{% notice "caution" %}}

> There is a functioning WebTransport implementation in go-libp2p that is part 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is an experimental WebTransport transport in go-libp2p that is part 
```

of the v0.23 release.

> The implementation should be used experimentally and is not recommended for

Reviewer 2: Combine with the prev paragraph.

Author: Updated

production environments.

{{% /notice %}}

For network stacks like libp2p, WebTransport is a pluggable
protocol that fits well with a modular network design.

For a standard WebSocket connection:

- 1 RTT for DNS resolution
- 1 RTT for TCP handshake
- 1 RTT for TLS handshake
- 1 RTT for WebSocket handshake
- 1 RTT for Multistream Security handshake

> - 1 RTT for libp2p handshake

Reviewer 2: What's this?

Author: Updated the roundtrip list

Plenty of handshakes and roundtrips: 6 RTTs: 5 handshakes + 1 DNS resolution

WebTransport running over QUIC only requires 4 RTTs, as:

- 1 RTT for QUIC handshake
- 1 RTT for WebTransport handshake

> - 2 RTT for libp2p handshake; one for multistream and one for the secure 

Reviewer 2: QUIC provides the security, we don't need to add TLS or noise here (we don't double encrypt).

We _do_ need to authenticate the connection and do that with a Noise handshake (see webtransport spec)

Author: Addressed

  communication (TLS 1.3 or Noise)

> With protocol select, the WebTransport handshake and the libp2p handshake 
> can run in parallel, bringing down the total round trips to 2.

WebTransport multiaddresses are composed of a QUIC multiaddr, followed 
by `/webtransport` and a list of multihashes of the node certificates that the server uses.

For instance, for multiaddress `/ip4/127.0.0.1/udp/123/quic/webtransport/certhash/<hash1>`, 
a standard local QUIC connection is defined up until and including `/quic.` 
Then, `/webtransport/` runs over QUIC and the self-signed certificate hash that the 
server will use to verify the connection.

WebTransport requires an HTTPS URL to establish a WebTransport session - 
e.g., `https://docs.libp2p.com/webtransport` and the multiaddresses use an HTTP URL

> instead. Since multiaddrs don't allow the encoding of URLs, the HTTP endpoint of a libp2p 

Reviewer 2: > Since multiaddrs don't allow the encoding of URLs,

This isn't exactly true. We just haven't defined what it would look like. Multiaddrs are able to encode urls, we just haven't come to consensus on what a canonical representation here looks like.

Author: Addressed

WebTransport servers must be located at `/.well-known/libp2p-webtransport`.

For instance, the WebTransport URL of a WebTransport server advertising 

> `/ip4/1.2.3.4/udp/1234/quic/webtransport/` would be `https://1.2.3.4:1234/.well-known/libp2p-webtransport?type=tls`.

Reviewer 2: I think it's `?type=noise` because this refers to the authentication handshake.

Author: Addressed

{{% /notice %}}

[definition_switch]: /reference/glossary/#switch

## QUIC

Transport protocols continue to improve transport methods in an attempt to alleviate 

> the shortcomings of the transport layer. 

Reviewer: I don’t understand this sentence. How about a quick summary of what QUIC is instead, something like “QUIC is a new transport protocol that provides an always-encrypted, stream-multiplexed connection built on top of UDP. It started as an experiment by Google in xxxx and was later standardized by the IETF <link to RFC 9000>”?

Author: Updated - combined the later paragraph with similar content which now introduces the section

{{% notice "note" %}}

> Recalling the purpose of transports

Reviewer: This paragraph is technically correct, but I don’t like the framing as transports being the thing that introduce reliability.

How about listing the problems that existed with TCP that led to the development of QUIC, namely:
1. it’s a single byte stream exposed by the kernel, so streams layered on top of TCP experience HoL blocking (this would be a good place to explain HoLB)
2. ossification: because TCP is unencrypted, middleboxes have been reading (and modifying!) TCP header fields and might break in unexpected ways when they encounter anything they don’t like
3. the TCP 3-way handshake is inefficient, as it spends 1 RTT on verifying the client’s address (that’s what the 3-way handshake is there for)

Author: nice suggestion, thought it would be good to also better define the flow and create subsection, with this being under its own

The IP service model provides logical communication between hosts (or nodes) but 
is considered a best-effort delivery service, as segment delivery is not guaranteed. 
The primary responsibility of transport protocols is to extend the IP 
delivery service between two end systems. TCP connects the unreliable service of IP 
between end systems into a reliable transport service between processes (i.e., the 
processes running on the end systems). The purpose of newer transport protocols is not 
only to improve current transport methods but also to allow for efficient connections 
that distributed and peer-to-peer network stacks can utilize, like libp2p.

{{% /notice %}}

We need a transport protocol that:

- Understands streams 
- Is not byte-ordered
- Overcomes HOL blocking (Head-of-line blocking)
- Overcomes the latency of connection setup
- Overcomes the ossification risks of TCP

and, ideally, keeps the guarantees of TCP.

In 2014, a new transport protocol 

> called QUIC (which, at the time, stood for Quick UDP Internet Connections, but now 

Reviewer: Please don’t use the abbreviation any more, it would be nice if people forgot about this ;)

Author: Gotcha:)

is only referred to as QUIC and does not use the original acronym) was launched as an 
experiment on Google Chrome. It has since been refined and maintained by an official 
working group under the IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force). 

QUIC is a UDP-based multiplexed and secure transport. 
The official standard is defined in [RFC 9000](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000).

> Being UDP-based, QUIC optimizes for speedy transmission, as opposed to the latency 

Reviewer: That’s not correct, a big part of QUIC’s performance gains are due to latency reductions (fewer RTTs during the handshake!). After that, it all depends on the congestion controller you’re using.
But I don’t think we need to say anything here.

Author: Addressed

that exists in HTTP leveraging TLS over TCP.

> A web browser connection typically entails the following (TCP+TLS+HTTP/2):

Reviewer: There’s a nice graphics floating around in various QUIC presentations showing QUIC’s position in the OSI stack. Maybe it would be worth including that one here?

Author: Indeed, planning to add diagrams separately (across the concept docs being added) in separate PRs, but can add this one here as part of this (part of that is to also to avoid a bunch of migration with the assets with the new proposed structure)

1. IP layer: the connection will run on the IP layer, which is responsible for 

>    packet routing. 

Reviewer: I think we can remove this. No need to talk to much about the IP layer, as it’s the same for TCP and QUIC.

Author: That is true

2. Transport layer: TCP then runs on top of the IP layer to provide a reliable 
   byte stream.
3. Secure communication layer: Secure communication (i.e., TLS) runs on TCP to 
   encrypt the bytes.

>    - Negotiation (SYN-ACK) of encryption parameters for TLS. Standard TLS over 

Reviewer: There’s no SYN-ACK in TLS (conceptually, yes, but it’s not called that way).

Maybe say something like this: A TLS handshake is run on top of the TCP connection, establishing an encrypted and authenticated connection between the two sides. A typical TLS 1.3 handshake takes 1 RTT.

Author: Incorporated suggestion

     TCP requires 3 RTT.

> 4. Application layer: HTTP runs on a secure transport connection to transfer 

Reviewer: Should we point out here that HTTP/2 applies a stream muxer?

   information.
   - Data starts to flow.

Secure TCP-based connections offer a multi-layered approach for secure communication 
over IP, whereas QUIC, by design, is an optimized transport consolidation of layers. 

> QUIC has to deal with TCP-like congestion control, loss recovery, and encryption. 

Reviewer: Suggestion:
QUIC combines the functionality of these layers: it sends UDP packets. Therefore, it is responsible for loss detection and repair itself. The TLS 1.3 handshake is performed in the first flight, removing the 1 RTT cost of verifying the client’s address. And it exposes multiple streams (as opposed to just a single byte stream), so no stream multiplexer is needed at the application layer.

Author: Incorporated suggestions

Part of the application layer is also built directly into QUIC; when you
run HTTP on top of QUIC; only a small shim layer exists that maps 
[HTTP semantics](https://httpwg.org/http-core/draft-ietf-httpbis-semantics-latest.html) 
onto QUIC streams.

> To establish a connection, QUIC assumes that the node sends the right address over

Reviewer: I think we can remove this paragraph. This is likely too specific.

Author: Removed

the packet. QUIC saves one round-trip by doing this. If there is suspicion of an 
attack, QUIC has a defense mechanism that can require a three-way handshake, but only 
under particular conditions. A minimum packet size rule exists for the first packet to 
ensure that small malicious packets like SYN packets cannot be sent and consume excessive 
resources, as can be done with TCP.

> QUIC saves another round-trip in using TLS 1.3 by optimistically providing keyshares. 

Reviewer: That’s not done by providing keyshares. Suggestion:
QUIC allows the resumption of connections (0-RTT connections). In that case, the client send application right away, even before the QUIC handshake has finished.

Author: Updated

If you have established a connection before, the host can send you a session ticket 
that can be used to establish a new secure connection instantly, without any round-trips.

> Over the last several years, the IETF has been working on a new version of TLS, TLS 1.3.
> Learn more about TLS 1.3 and how it is used in libp2p on the secure communication concept guide.

<!-- to add link to secure comm guide, and later to the specific doc that covers TLS -->

libp2p only supports bidirectional streams and uses TLS 1.3 by default (but can use other

> cryptography methods). The streams in libp2p map cleanly to QUIC streams.

Reviewer: There’s no way to use other handshakes.

Author: Removed

When a connection starts, peers will take their host key and create a self-signed CA 
certificate. They then sign an intermediate chain using their self-signed CA and put it 
as a certificate chain in the TLS handshake. View the full TLS specification
[here](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/tls/tls.md).

At the end of the handshake, each peer knows the certificate of the other. The peer can 
verify if the connection was established with the correct peer by looking up the first 
CA certificate on the certificate chain, retreive the public key, and using it to calculate 

> the opposing peer ID. QUIC acts like a record layer with TLS 1.3 as the backend as TLS is 

Reviewer: I think this paragraph can be removed, this is very specific to libp2p-tls and doesn’t matter unless you actually want to implement libp2p-tls (in which case you should use the spec).

Author: Also removed

{{% /notice %}}

[definition_switch]: /reference/glossary/#switch

## QUIC

QUIC is a new transport protocol that provides an always-encrypted, stream-multiplexed 
connection built on top of UDP. It started as an experiment by Google on Google Chrome 
in 2014, and was later standardized by the IETF in 
[RFC 9000](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000).

### Key challenges with TCP

1. Head-of-line blocking (HoL blocking): TCP is a single byte stream exposed by the kernel, 

>    so streams layered on top of TCP experience HoL blocking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   so streams layered on top of TCP experience head-of-line (HoL) blocking.
```

   {{% notice "info" %}}

>    HoL blocking occurs when a lost, or out-of-order delivered head packet holds up the other packets in the transmission 
>    queue. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In TCP, head-of-line blocking occurs when a single packet is lost, and packets delivered after that need to wait in the kernel buffer until a retransmission for the lost packet is received.
```

   {{% /notice %}}

> 2. Ossification: Because TCP is unencrypted, middleboxes can inspect and modify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Ossification: Because the header of TCP packet is unencrypted, middleboxes can inspect and modify
```

>    TCP header fields and may break unexpectedly when they encounter anything they don’t like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   TCP header fields and may break unexpectedly when they encounter anything they don’t understand.
   This makes it practically impossible to deploy any changes to the TCP protocol that change the wire format.
```

3. Handshake inefficiency: the 3-way handshake is inefficient, as it spends 1-RTT on verifying 
   the client’s address.

> We need a transport protocol that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QUIC was designed with the following goals in mind:
```

> - Understands streams 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Streams at the transport layer, thereby overcoming HoL blocking
```

> - Overcomes HOL blocking (Head-of-line blocking)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - Overcomes the latency of connection setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reducing the latency of connection establishment to a single RTT for new connections, and to allow sending of 0-RTT application data for resumed connections
```

> - Overcomes the ossification risks of TCP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Encrypting as much as possible. This eliminates the ossification risk, as middleboxes aren't able to read any encrypted fields, and allows future evolution of the protocol
```

> and, ideally, keeps the guarantees of TCP.

Reviewer: Not sure which guarantees that would be.
```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: It would probably make sense to make this a section "Comparing HTTP/2 and HTTP/3"

A web browser connection typically entails the following (TCP+TLS+HTTP/2):

1. Transport layer: TCP runs on top of the IP layer to provide a reliable 
   byte stream.
   - TCP provides a reliable, bidirectional connection between two end systems.
2. Secure communication layer: A TLS handshake runs on top of TCP to
   establish an encrypted and authenticated connection.
   - Standard TLS over TCP requires 3-RTT. A typical TLS 1.3 handshake takes 1-RTT.
3. Application layer: HTTP runs on a secure transport connection to transfer 
   information and applies a stream muxer to serve multiple requests.
   - Application data starts to flow.

> <!-- to add diagram -->

Reviewer: Can we do this in this PR?

### What is QUIC?

QUIC combines the functionality of these layers. It sends UDP packets and therefore
it is responsible for loss detection and repair itself. By using encryption, 
QUIC avoids ossified middleboxes. The TLS 1.3 handshake is performed in the first flight, 
removing the 1-RTT cost of verifying the client’s address. QUIC also exposes multiple 
streams, so no stream multiplexer is needed at the application layer. Part of the application 
layer is also built directly into QUIC; when you run HTTP on top of QUIC; only a small shim 
layer exists that maps 
[HTTP semantics](https://httpwg.org/http-core/draft-ietf-httpbis-semantics-latest.html) 
onto QUIC streams.

QUIC supports the resumption of connections (0-RTT connections), allowing a 
client to send application data right away, even before the QUIC handshake has finished.

<!-- to add diagram -->

### QUIC in libp2p

libp2p only supports bidirectional streams and uses TLS 1.3 by default. 

> The streams in libp2p map cleanly to QUIC streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
libp2p directly uses QUIC streams, without any additional framing.
```

> When a connection starts, peers will take their host key and create a self-signed 
> CA certificate. They then sign an intermediate chain using their self-signed CA certificate 
> and put it as a certificate chain in the TLS handshake. View the full TLS specification
> [here](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/tls/tls.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To authenticate each others' peer IDs, peers encode their peer ID into a self-signed certificate,
which they sign using their host's private key. This is the same way peer IDs are authenticated in
the [libp2p TLS handshake](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/tls/tls.md).
```

{{% notice "note" %}}

> To be clear, there is no additional security handshake and stream muxer needed as QUIC 
> provides all of this by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be clear, there is no additional security handshake and stream muxer needed as QUIC 
provides all of this by default. This also means that establishing a libp2p connection between
two nodes using QUIC only takes a single RTT.
```

{{% /notice %}}

Following the multiaddress format described earlier, a standard QUIC connection will
look like: `/ip4/127.0.0.1/udp/65432/quic/`.

> 
> In this section, we offered an overview of QUIC and how QUIC works in libp2p.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{{% /notice %}}

[definition_switch]: /reference/glossary/#switch

## QUIC

QUIC is a new transport protocol that provides an always-encrypted, stream-multiplexed 
connection built on top of UDP. It started as an experiment by Google on Google Chrome 
in 2014, and was later standardized by the IETF in 
[RFC 9000](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000).

### Key challenges with TCP

1. Head-of-line blocking (HoL blocking): TCP is a single byte stream exposed by the kernel, 
   so streams layered on top of TCP experience HoL blocking.

   {{% notice "info" %}}

>    HoL blocking occurs when a the head packet holds up the other packets in the transmission 
>    queue. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   HoL blocking occurs when a lost, or out-of-order delivered head packet holds up the other packets in the transmission 
   queue. 
```

   {{% /notice %}}

2. Ossification: Because TCP is unencrypted, middleboxes can inspect and modify
   TCP header fields and may break unexpectedly when they encounter anything they don’t like.

   {{% notice "info" %}}
   Middleboxes are intermediary networking devices that can perform special functions to 
   inspect, transform, and even manipulate network traffic. Examples of middleboxes are 
   firewalls, NATs, proxies, and load balancers.
   {{% /notice %}}

3. Handshake inefficiency: the 3-way handshake is inefficient, as it spends 1-RTT on verifying 
   the client’s address.

   {{% notice "info" %}}
   TCP requires a 3-way handshake to establish a reliable, bidirectional connection as it intends to.

>    {{% /notice %}}

Reviewer 3: (Personal opinion, others might disagree):
For both points (2. & 3.) I don't feel like the _notice_ adds much substance to what's already been said. In particular the notice on point 3 could be removed.

Author: I agree here as well, for both notices you mention. Updated

We need a transport protocol that:

- Understands streams 
- Overcomes HOL blocking (Head-of-line blocking)
- Overcomes the latency of connection setup
- Overcomes the ossification risks of TCP

and, ideally, keeps the guarantees of TCP.

A web browser connection typically entails the following (TCP+TLS+HTTP/2):

1. Transport layer: TCP runs on top of the IP layer to provide a reliable 
   byte stream.
   - TCP provides a reliable, bidirectional connection between two end systems.

> 2. Secure communication layer: A TLS handshake runs on top of TCP to,
>    establishing an encrypted and authenticated connection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Secure communication layer: A TLS handshake runs on top of TCP to
   establishing an encrypted and authenticated connection.
```

   - Standard TLS over TCP requires 3-RTT. A typical TLS 1.3 handshake takes 1-RTT.
3. Application layer: HTTP runs on a secure transport connection to transfer 
   information and applies a stream muxer to serve multiple requests.
   - Application data starts to flow.

<!-- to add diagram -->

### What is QUIC?

> QUIC combines the functionality of these layers: it sends UDP packets. Therefore, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
QUIC combines the functionality of these layers. It sends UDP packets and therefore
```
This phrasing is imo a bit misleading. I would either remove the colons or make the following points a bullet-point list.

it is responsible for loss detection and repair itself. By using encryption, 

> QUIC avoid middleboxes. The TLS 1.3 handshake is performed in the first flight, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
QUIC avoids ossified middleboxes. The TLS 1.3 handshake is performed in the first flight, 
```

removing the 1-RTT cost of verifying the client’s address. QUIC also exposes multiple 
streams, so no stream multiplexer is needed at the application layer. Part of the application 
layer is also built directly into QUIC; when you run HTTP on top of QUIC; only a small shim 
layer exists that maps 
[HTTP semantics](https://httpwg.org/http-core/draft-ietf-httpbis-semantics-latest.html) 
onto QUIC streams.

QUIC supports the resumption of connections (0-RTT connections), allowing a 
client to send application data right away, even before the QUIC handshake has finished.

<!-- to add diagram -->

### QUIC in libp2p

libp2p only supports bidirectional streams and uses TLS 1.3 by default. 
The streams in libp2p map cleanly to QUIC streams.

When a connection starts, peers will take their host key and create a self-signed CA 

> certificate. They then sign an intermediate chain using their self-signed CA and put it 

Reviewer 3: Unsure about this, but is it still a **CA** (= Certificate authority) certificate if it is self-signed? @marten-seemann?

Author: You can set up your own CA and use it to self-sign - my understanding is that as QUIC only works with secure connections, the certificate needs to be issued by a CA instead of it just being self-signed

Reviewer: > the certificate needs to be issued by a CA instead of it just being self-signed

On the x509 level, that's the same thing. Any certificate that signs another certificates is a CA certificate. That said, browsers (and many other TLS implementaions) will (in their default setting) only accept CAs from a list of trusted CAs, either shipped with the OS or the browser.

QUIC doesn't introduce any special requirements here. The properties are exactly what they are for a normal TLS 1.3 handshake. QUIC just define a way to run a handshake that doesn't do a TLS 1.3 handshake.
